I'm here to talk about editorial design in craft. And this is really how we do it at Louder Than 10. There's lots of ways to do it. This is really the result of a lot of experimentation. It might not be for everybody, but hopefully you take something out of this and maybe view it in ways it wasn't necessarily designed for. But let's have fun. So, to begin with, I want to go a little bit back in history to the beginning of editorial design. This is the very first newspaper. It's called the Oxford Gazette. It quickly changed to the London Gazette, which is actually still around today. This is from 1665. It was printed using 15th century printing technology. So if anyone has ever done any letterpress or anything like that before, you'll be pretty familiar with the process. You have to lay down each letter, letter by letter, for this whole damn thing, fill it with shims and spacers and clamp it down and set it just on a flat plate or in a mold, and then you just press your paper on it. And it takes forever. It's a long time. So this process to make this two-sided thing probably took a little while. And so for the next couple hundred years, newspapers looked a lot like this. They were maybe two to eight pages long, tops, and they were released weekly just because it was so long to-- it took so much work to do. And so you don't get many images or anything, but we really developed typography in this time because of these limitations. Fast forward a couple hundred years and we get a new printing innovation, the Linotype Machine. I don't know if you guys have ever seen this, but it's like this crazy, dangerous Rube Goldberg machine basically, where a guy sits on a mechanical keyboard and as he types, this little mold forms out of little copper molds and there's a bucket of hot molten lead beside him and It just fills up and then runs down a chute, and then line by line it stacks up basically a column of text. Although this is dangerous, it's still a pain in the ass. These things break all the time. It increases the speed of printing by a huge order of magnitude. This is really what enabled the birth of the modern newspaper, like the New York Times and stuff. They could print a lot more content over a lot more pages, and they could do it daily. Because of this innovation alone, first of all, it becomes more accessible to a greater size of the population. General reporting becomes a thing now, so we can get a lot more current events going around. Also at the same time, we get sort of the birth of the magazine too. The magazine came out of actually as a response to political corruption and social injustice, and it was a way for us to have some deep commentary on what was happening in the world. It was also the birth of investigative journalism. Because they had this luxury of time, like you could have a month-long issue, they could start playing a little more with colors and typography, imagery, things like that. And it became a bit of a premium product. And so we move again to another about 100 years or so from the '50s to '70s. We get photo type setting, and that becomes really popular in all these mediums. And because of this, we move away from this hot metal into basically typeset with light and photography. And so fonts can be any size. We can have any color we want. We're no longer bound by like these square rectangular constraints. And we go crazy. This is really the birth of just crazy editorial work. went nuts with it. It was also during this postmodernist design period as well, so we get just weird, shitty type and stuff like this that comes out of it. But it's fun. It's really experimental. During this period, we're also going through, in the West, this mass increase in consumption. Magazines really are a reflection of what's going on in society. We have malls, we've got pop culture, celebrity, fashion, all of these things, and they get sort of reflected back in the content we make. And so magazines are responsible for a lot of bad things, body image things, a lot of advertising is produced through these, but also a lot of good things, too. There's a lot of more art that's accessible to the world and lots of really great in-depth content. And so this really gets down to this point, I think, for me. It's that we do shape our tools, and thereafter, the tools shape us. Now, this was said by John Culkin. It often gets attributed to Marshall McLuhan. They were buddies, and I think Culkin was talking about McLuhan's concept, so whatever, if anyone says anything, if you're ever at a cocktail party and that comes up, you can stick it to them. But this is fascinating to me, because I feel like all of us in here we're all responsible for building tools. And in some ways, the tools that have brought us to this point have shaped a lot of the ways we approach building websites, presenting content, and producing content, not even just within the things we build, but as the larger society. And so the web kind of went through a similar period. So kind of web 1.0, like the late '90s, I kind of see as our monotype years, or our movable type years. Everything is so hard, right? Like slicing images and cramming them into tables. Everything is very manually done. Most of these publications don't have any money or care for any of this stuff. Surprisingly, the New York Times actually looks really good for 1996. That's the one exception I found. But most places, it's just a place to sell subscriptions, things like that. And then in businesses, it's kind of the toy. Ad agencies will put maybe some nerd on it and let the rest of the creative team work on the print work for a few years. But then we hit this period in time between 2000 and 2007. And I think we forget about this time frame a lot, right? It's explosive. In 2000, you were probably browsing the web on a dial-up connection, most likely on a Windows PC of some sort. And then by 2007, you were probably on broadband, you were on a Mac. A lot of us were anyway. We-- like CSS came around, so we were able to basically display anything we wanted. But a lot of parts of culture were still very far behind in some ways. We were speeding up and trying to catch up, but the newspaper industry and the magazine industry, they were lagging behind. They had no idea how to approach this stuff. So still, it got no love. None of the really conceptual graphic design ever got brought over really in this time. And I think a big part of that too is because the tools never really evolved either. So Adobe during this time had no idea how the web worked, and they had no idea how we we were using their own tools, I think. So we'd all use Photoshop. And at the beginning of the period, it was like, oh, we'd make a Photoshop comp, and we could go to 800 pixels wide. And that was like this static thing built with images, placed in different ways. And then maybe it was 1024 by whatever wide. And then anyone remember doing sprites for navigation and things like that? It was just so painful. Oh, God. Sorry, just like a PTSD moment there. So our sites were super fragile. We didn't want anything to change on there. So that really dictated, I think, the control that we handed over to clients. It dictated how we set up our design teams and our newsrooms and all these processes. And so you can only touch this piece. Content first was critical, not from even a wider perspective, but because you had this little box that you had to get exactly right, and it-- or else everything would blow up. And so everything that we built was just sort of built for this automation, repetition, and consistency. This was the factor. Everything drove us to this. All the content that did make it on the web, it was basically blogs, quick snippets, throw as much of the shit out as you can. And the real careful conceptual stuff was still in print for a lot of this. And so I think that's what led to a lot of the tools we created at first, right? Like between WordPress and Drupal and some of the design tools we use, it was really focused on building a template and customizing it. And it was really based on still two fields, like a title and a body, and maybe an excerpt and things like that. And it just had a profound effect from there on how our sites really were built and how we thought about the whole process. I think it really defined-- it really cemented in this waterfall approach even, where we had to do design work. We had to then do a front end template to make it all work. and then we'd maybe plug a CMS on the back of it. 2007 comes, and of course, everything changes. We have to relearn how to design. And so in order to do that, we sort of create these tools, I think, because our fixed grid sites full of images, they just don't cut it anymore. But it's really hard, right? So we use Bootstrap and Foundation to help with some of the grid systems and the navigation and stuff like that. But then this other problem sort of crops up, I find. And so the next few years, we sort of have this similarity come forward where we're using the same patterns over and over again. And they all kind of stem from tools like this. And there's something to be said about consistency. But really, you kind of just don't even know what belongs to who anymore. At the same time, there's also the proliferation of these platforms. Around 2007, 2008, we get Facebook and Twitter. Medium comes around. And because at this time it's way easier to set up a Medium site than like your own blog or another site, and it gets distributed easier, we just flock to it. But I think there's a serious consequence to it that we're just seeing right now. As we centralize everything, all of our content and our world's data onto single platforms, we also tend to neutralize the work that happens. By neutral, I really mean from the perspective of white Silicon Valley. It's not real neutral, but this more generic corporate thing. Then after that, we move into this dehumanization factor that comes from the big data and everything else that surrounds it. As an example, this is the Bold Italic. This is one of the first art-directed sites that I loved. This was created in the late 2000s. This article was published in 2010. It's beautiful. It's immersive. You've got this illustration that was made just for this article. You get some interesting typography. It's like full color background. It looks like the bold italic. There's no mistake that it could be anything else. This is what it looks like now since they've moved to medium. It's just so sad to me. It just looks like medium. That's all it does. It looks like just a generic corporate blog. It could be done at any time. And so I think what this comes down to is we don't care about the content anymore, or maybe we never did on the web. We just care about what it can do with us. That's why the majority of it is for marketing purposes. We all have blog posts that are like, "Top 10 reasons that this happens," or whatever. We don't ever put the time into it that I think it deserves or good content deserves. So I think this leads to like, this is from Brave New World, if anyone's familiar, but we get like this dehumanizing effect that I think between the platforms and everything else and we just start to see, we get like this, the sanitization of content and everything we look at starts to look the same, we start behaving the same, we get divisive. I'm worried about when VR comes, how much that's going to affect it. So I think it's time for a reset. I think all of us in this room can maybe move us forward in a way where we can maybe take back a little bit of expression and sort of pull back from the platforms a little, maybe pull other people from the platforms onto our sites and make things a little more human. I think this got us thinking about how we use our own tools at Louder Than 10. And so we don't do client work anymore. We have a magazine on our site. We used to do a lot of client work, but at the time we were thinking of ways that we could build sites that still, that were safe for clients to use, but were added, allowed them to have a little bit more expression in other people too. And so we started looking at editorial design, But really we realized it was all about the editorial systems. I've been obsessed with magazine design. That's what I went to school for, was the publishing industry. And so we're all familiar with the systems that come with a website. There's typographic systems, templating systems, content management systems, of course, and those are great. But what I'm really interested in is the connection between all those things. And we're starting to get good at a lot of those on the technical side. But I want to see how we can improve that in a lot of other places. And so I want to talk about-- let's take apart a print magazine here. This is one of my favorite magazines right now. It's a political magazine called Jacobin. I think one thing that we really solidified in our minds on the web is that everything really needs to look consistent on every page. And if we don't, then we're going to lose the users. Ironically, because now all of our sites really look similar and alike, that is actually more confusing because your site is no different than someone else's. You have this confusion that way anyway. But I think in reality, you only need a real thin thread to pull it all together. It doesn't have to be so over the top in terms of monotony. You'd be over the top in other ways. But like, there's only like two elements on these two layouts that tie it together. And that's the title, the meta tag, maybe like the overall grid. But you can tell that they're from the same publication. They're only two issues apart. This one's very intricate. It's skeu-morphized. It's meant to look a bit like a voter card. And this one's much more ephemeral. There's like an infographic sort of hidden in there, but it's a little bit of work. It's a little bit of mental exercise to understand what's going on. And it doesn't matter if you do catch it, it's just sort of like a nice extra. When we actually crack open the magazine, this is sort of their good baseline article. It's pretty standard. They have the same typography in general. The layout's a little different to accommodate the text. Same metadata. The colors of the metadata are slightly different to go with the article theme. But it creates this good baseline. If every article in the magazine looked like this, it would be fine and it would work out. I think where a lot of us are on the web is about this level. This is where we go. It looks great, but I think we can do better. If we go later to a feature article, that's when things go totally different. Again on the left we get something that mimics the cover. There's more intricate illustration and that sort of voting thing again. This one's much more ephemeral, which floats with the issue content a lot more. The body copy uses their two different fonts, but overall it's still, even with all those changes, they do look like they belong together. They follow the same overall grid. The typefaces are close enough. Or the sans typefaces are the same. It's enough to tie them together. And so I think the moral of this is that-- and the thing that we really wanted to do in our practice is to think about, don't stop at the system. We have our component libraries and everything else like that. That's a great place to start. But then figure out how we can humanize it, build on top of that. So years ago, we built like this little-- right in about 2012, we were trying to think of how can we prototype for our clients in a way where they could view it on different screen sizes and everything else like that. We tried MyBalsamic and a few other tools. But we found that either clients thought those were the actual designs and we were just not good at our job, and we could never try it out on a site. So basically, all I did is I created a really stripped down set of CSS files, and we just had some just blank HTML pages that we could play around with. Me and my partner, who is also a writer, we would work together on a lot of things. So she would write content. I'd put them in HTML file. And then we would apply these just baseline classes to be able to move things around. And at the same time, we had built a component library that sat on it. So our process was pretty good for clients. We would just manually write out an HTML prototype. Then we'd style the style guide. The CSS would be connected. And we'd actually have a pretty good baseline right off the top. And so this was great, but we still had to put it into the CMS. And so we were trying to think of-- for years, we thought of, how can we actually get this into something like craft, where what if the content development part-- since we've got to write it in there anyway-- what if we could start with the CMS at the beginning rather than plug it in at the end? How would that change things? I mean, for one, we could make the process more agile. We could get developers in at the beginning of the project. We could work a lot more iteratively through the thing. And then we could fine tune it like you're sculpting a sculpture by the end. And so then we found tachyons. Is anyone familiar with tachyons? Yeah, it's super great. It's basically a really light CSS library where you have these immutable styles where they do just very basic things. Like, italic has one purpose. It makes the font italic. You have semivold, and you can do that. So it's just a full library of pretty much every CSS argument you can think of. And what I figured is actually this is perfect, because this makes our CSS CMS readable. Now we can start kind of having fun with things. And we thought, what if we made Kraft the nucleus of our editorial system? Not even after we've got articles, but what if we could prototype with it? And this is super experimental, but super fun. And so we started thinking, OK, cool. Our field values can be classes. So all those values there are is just the immutable styles that we can use. And they represent a pretty complex grid system that we built for our site. It just has a four column, a three column, and a five column grid on it. And this is all in a layout, a super table field. So along the left side, we also have a few other fields that I'll show you in a second here too. We combine that with Neo, which is pretty crazy. It's like a matrix field on crack. You can nest blocks, which is cool. It's nuts. We've made a ton of really granular components for it. But the really exciting part for me was that I could reuse other fields. And it's got its own-- each one of these components has its own field layout designer. So I can just use that layout field that I showed in the last field into every kind of thing. So now every component all of a sudden has its own grid system attached to it. And so this is sort of what it looks like finished on our site here. So we have on the left here, we've got a callout component with a text one nested in it. We don't like to do a lot of nesting, but for this it's actually really good. So the basic thing is you can change the background color to either of our brand colors. It's very controlled. And then you've got the text underneath it. The other nice thing about Neo is there's the tabs. So if you go to the layout field, that's what it actually looks like when we have it. So each row is basically a different break point. So we can have a small break, a small mobile, whatever, and we can change the grid width, whether it gets pushed to the left or the right, if it's floated, where the text alignment is. And then we have a super advanced one where we can just put in any of those extra immutable CSS classes in there or an anchor name. So it's pretty crazy. But now that I know how to make plugins from Megan, that maybe I can actually make this a little easier on ourselves. So this is how the components work in it. It's pretty basic. I just simplified this for this purpose. But all it's really doing is going through each of those layout blocks that I showed. And so it's just building classes. So you just get an array of classes that really describe how that each little component can behave, which gives us just a ton of freaking flexibility. So this is sort of the result of all that. Starting from scratch, this is like a naked install with basically these fields and our live wires like prototyping CSS attached to it. And so we can go pretty crazy. Me and Rachel, we worked together like content and design at first. And we figure out what our structured content needs to be, like in real time. We can show the client. We can walk them through this. This whole layout occurred in five and a half minutes. And so it just happens really quick. And it's a really fun and fluid way to work, at least internally. I don't know that I would give that out to a client, but for our purposes and for really experimenting, it's a super fun tool. We also build a matrix field into all of our pages so that we have a full set of colors. You could do this so it's controlled with brand colors or whatever. And then we also apply typography so we can have a lot of control over the headers just with very simple classes. So again, this is going super extreme with pretty ugly things, but it just shows the flexibility want to build in it, especially for that iterating field section at the beginning. So for us, this is maybe the beginning of the photo type setting era of playing with the web on our end. It's just not always good, but it's a lot of fun. And we just can go crazy with it. So when we actually apply this to real life, this is an article-- like this is the next article that's going out on our blog. This is the baseline. If we don't do anything else to it, it goes out like this. It looks fine. It's great. And so that's just our baseline system. And now this is-- I started just designing it. And so I recorded it last week when I was playing around with it. I did this over about an hour, and it's almost done. But in reality, spending an hour on one long-form article that's been-- someone wrote. We edited it. Our editor, Marshall, who's not a designer or developer, he put all the content in, separated the blocks by section, put the callouts in. All I had to do was go in here and start playing with the grid, experimenting, playing with colors. For our internal thing, it's so much fun. We just-- yeah. So you can get nuts. So I know what you're all thinking. Yeah, but I can do this with clients. And you'd be right. But we also have to understand that clients are getting a lot more savvy. We have a spectrum now. So a lot of internal teams have great designers, and they have people that know HTML and CSS. So maybe we can give them a little more control and a little more opportunity to play and to do things like this. And so you have to think about where they sit on the spectrum. Our thought isn't to start at the beginning and move up. It's to go the opposite. That's why we have such a crazy system right now. We start them at the very far end here. And then the more we want to restrict them, we can remove components and we can simplify them down. And it's a lot easier process for us. And so here's some ways that if you are working with clients to really give them some power without completely breaking things. So color is one of the most underutilized design elements on the web, I think, in my opinion. I think it's something so simple, it's lightweight, but it made such a huge, crazy impact, or has the potential to. Like all of these-- like print does this really well. All of these pieces, the typography is OK, but really it's the color that steals the show. And it's just-- it can be bold, it can be subtle, but you can have very limited color palettes that you give them. But give them to big pieces. Make the whole page something that's a little bit different, for example, and something like this, pretty simple layout, but that color, it just pops so much. It looks like nothing else. It's beautiful. You can even do it just on the text itself. It doesn't always have to be black text on white. And we can have fun. This is an easy thing to grant people without locking it down and worrying about them breaking. Another thing is type. We're notorious for using a single typeface or really locking them down. Every year I used to go to TypeCon all the time and we have all these amazing independent designers with crazy fonts that are available that are relatively inexpensive, but they add so much texture to it. It doesn't always have to be Open Sans or something like that. By using that a different era than what's common, we just get a nice, different texture to the web that I think it just says something different. We're not used to seeing something like this. Or even playing with type as an illustration is a fun thing that we just don't really see. I know this isn't easy to do dynamically. Maybe you could with some SVG thing. I don't know, but it'd be great. The other thing, and the last thing I kind of want to go over is the graphics. This is another area that I'd love to see us move towards more, is more conceptual work like this. With images, it's one of the areas that I think we tend to lean on Unsplash a lot or just general stock photography, but it has no real connection to the written content within it. If you look at a lot of the really important work in editorial design and graphics, you have this direct connection where you can't remove the words or the image without completely changing the meaning. And also, you're using images that only work with that content. And it just creates this really immersive connection that I think it's so hard to duplicate. like some places are doing this really well pro public oh god soul space and vector you guys I want to talk to you after this about what you guys did this cut but I love seeing this stuff like there this image was made for this article and it's it's just adds an extra level of legitimacy you know that there's no Russian hackers going through this kind of trouble to to make an important long-form piece like this And so the one thing on that back on that spectrum where I showed the design master to disaster, I actually feel like images are something that goes more in the middle, yet we give clients a lot of power over those. But who here has had a client post like a big header image on their homepage with like maybe impact font just embedded in it. It's the wrong size, and it's all blurry and everything like that. It just makes it look terrible. And so it's hard to do when you don't give them image stuff. But here's a clever way I thought that I saw that you could approach that, is just apply some CSS filters over it. Because that's not a very good image at all. But it looks pretty good in this layout, just because of the use of color and the mutedness of everything there. And then also, just commission some illustrators. This is our site. We use illustrators every now and then. And it makes it just so easy. It's so much fun to work with. They read the piece and they make something based on that. And it just creates such an impact. And it doesn't take long. It doesn't take much work. This whole thing probably took us about an hour to put together, not including the illustration work, but it just takes it to a nice, just an exciting level. So I want us to go back to work and think about how we can rehumanize the web, really like make our sites, the sites that aren't on platforms, give people a reason to leave those things, right? How can we give maybe just a little more control to clients, especially if they're more savvy? How can we empower great editorial work and take it from the Linotype era to the photo typesetting and computer era? If you want to see any of these crazy experiments or see the slides or anything, you can go here. some resources and stuff like that. That's it. 